README.md, before:

<div align="center">
  <h1>🎙️ microWakeWord Nvidia Trainer & Recorder</h1>
  <img width="1002" height="593" alt="Screenshot 2026-01-18 at 8 13 35 AM" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/e1411d8a-8638-4df8-992b-09a46c6e5ddc" />
</div>

Train **microWakeWord** detection models using a simple **web-based recorder + trainer UI**, packaged in a Docker container.

No Jupyter notebooks required. No manual cell execution. Just record your voice (optional) and train.

---

<img width="100" height="44" alt="unraid_logo_black-339076895" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/87351bed-3321-4a43-924f-fecf2e4e700f" />

**microWakeWord_Trainer-Nvidia** is available in the **Unraid Community Apps** store.
Install directly from the Unraid App Store with a one-click template.

---

<img width="100" height="56" alt="unraid_logo_black-339076895" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/bf959585-ae13-4b4d-ae62-4202a850d35a" />


### Pull the Docker Image

```bash
docker pull ghcr.io/tatertotterson/microwakeword:latest
```

---

### Run the Container

```bash
docker run -d \
  --gpus all \
  -p 8888:8888 \
  -v $(pwd):/data \
  ghcr.io/tatertotterson/microwakeword:latest
```

**What these flags do:**
- `--gpus all` → Enables GPU acceleration  
- `-p 8888:8888` → Exposes the Recorder + Trainer WebUI  
- `-v $(pwd):/data` → Persists all models, datasets, and cache  

---

### Open the Recorder WebUI

Open your browser and go to:

👉 **http://localhost:8888**

You’ll see the **microWakeWord Recorder & Trainer UI**.

---

## 🎤 Recording Voice Samples (Optional)

Personal voice recordings are **optional**.

- You may **record your own voice** for better accuracy  
- Or simply **click “Train” without recording anything**

If no recordings are present, training will proceed using **synthetic TTS samples only**.

### Remote systems (important)
If you are running this on a **remote PC / server**, browser-based recording will not work unless:
- You use a **reverse proxy** (HTTPS + mic permissions), **or**
- You access the UI via **localhost** on the same machine

Training itself works fine remotely — only recording requires local microphone access.

---

### 🎙️ Recording Flow

1. Enter your wake word
2. Test pronunciation with **Test TTS**
3. Choose:
   - Number of speakers (e.g. family members)
   - Takes per speaker (default: 10)
4. Click **Begin recording**
5. Speak naturally — recording:
   - Starts when you talk
   - Stops automatically after silence
6. Repeat for each speaker

Files are saved automatically to:

```
personal_samples/
  speaker01_take01.wav
  speaker01_take02.wav
  speaker02_take01.wav
  ...
```

---

## 🧠 Training Behavior (Important Notes)

### ⏬ First training run
The **first time you click Train**, the system will download **large training datasets** (background noise, speech corpora, etc.).

- This can take **several minutes**
- This happens **only once**
- Data is cached inside `/data`

You **will NOT need to download these again** unless you delete `/data`.

---

### 🔁 Re-training is safe and incremental

- You can train **multiple wake words** back-to-back
- You do **NOT** need to clear any folders between runs
- Old models are preserved in timestamped output directories
- All required cleanup and reuse logic is handled automatically

---

## 📦 Output Files

When training completes, you’ll get:
- `<wake_word>.tflite` – quantized streaming model  
- `<wake_word>.json` – ESPHome-compatible metadata  

Both are saved under:

```text
/data/output/
```

Each run is placed in its own timestamped folder.

---

## 🎤 Optional: Personal Voice Samples (Advanced)

If you record personal samples:
- They are automatically augmented
- They are **up-weighted during training**
- This significantly improves real-world accuracy

No configuration required — detection is automatic.

---

## 🔄 Resetting Everything (Optional)

If you want a **completely clean slate**:

Delete the /data folder

Then restart the container.

⚠️ This will:
- Remove cached datasets
- Require re-downloading training data
- Delete trained models

---

## 🙌 Credits

Built on top of the excellent  
**https://github.com/kahrendt/microWakeWord**

Huge thanks to the original authors ❤️

Commit message:

initial russian wake-word trainer

README.md, after:

<div align="center">
  <h1>🎙️ microWakeWord Nvidia Trainer & Recorder</h1>
  <img width="1002" height="593" alt="Screenshot 2026-01-18 at 8 13 35 AM" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/e1411d8a-8638-4df8-992b-09a46c6e5ddc" />
</div>

Train **microWakeWord** detection models using a simple **web-based recorder + trainer UI**, packaged in a Docker container.

No Jupyter notebooks required. No manual cell execution. Just record your voice (optional) and train.

---

<img width="100" height="44" alt="unraid_logo_black-339076895" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/87351bed-3321-4a43-924f-fecf2e4e700f" />

**microWakeWord_Trainer-Nvidia** is available in the **Unraid Community Apps** store.
Install directly from the Unraid App Store with a one-click template.

---

<img width="100" height="56" alt="unraid_logo_black-339076895" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/bf959585-ae13-4b4d-ae62-4202a850d35a" />


### Pull the Docker Image

```bash
docker pull ghcr.io/skrashevich/microwakeword:latest
```

---

### Run the Container

```bash
docker run -d \
  --gpus all \
  -p 2704:2704 \
  -v $(pwd):/data \
  ghcr.io/skrashevich/microwakeword:latest
```

**What these flags do:**
- `--gpus all` → Enables GPU acceleration  
- `-p 2704:2704` → Exposes the Recorder + Trainer WebUI  
- `-v $(pwd):/data` → Persists all models, datasets, and cache  

---

### Open the Recorder WebUI

Open your browser and go to:

👉 **http://localhost:2704**

You’ll see the **microWakeWord Recorder & Trainer UI**.

---

## 🎤 Recording Voice Samples (Optional)

Personal voice recordings are **optional**.

- You may **record your own voice** for better accuracy  
- Or simply **click “Train” without recording anything**

If no recordings are present, training will proceed using **synthetic TTS samples only**.

### Remote systems (important)
If you are running this on a **remote PC / server**, browser-based recording will not work unless:
- You use a **reverse proxy** (HTTPS + mic permissions), **or**
- You access the UI via **localhost** on the same machine

Training itself works fine remotely — only recording requires local microphone access.

---

### 🎙️ Recording Flow

1. Enter your wake word
2. Test pronunciation with **Test TTS**
3. Choose:
   - Number of speakers (e.g. family members)
   - Takes per speaker (default: 10)
4. Click **Begin recording**
5. Speak naturally — recording:
   - Starts when you talk
   - Stops automatically after silence
6. Repeat for each speaker

Files are saved automatically to:

```
personal_samples/
  speaker01_take01.wav
  speaker01_take02.wav
  speaker02_take01.wav
  ...
```

---

## 🇷🇺 Russian Wake Words

For Russian phrases, select **Русский** (or keep **Auto**) in the Web UI.

If you train via CLI inside the container, use:

```bash
train_wake_word --phrase "привет дом" --lang ru
```

You can also set a safe ASCII id for filenames:

```bash
train_wake_word --phrase "привет дом" --lang ru --id privet_dom
```

By default, Russian TTS uses Piper voice **ru_RU-dmitri-medium**.  
The model is downloaded automatically the first time it is needed.

---

## 🧠 Training Behavior (Important Notes)

### ⏬ First training run
The **first time you click Train**, the system will download **large training datasets** (background noise, speech corpora, etc.).

- This can take **several minutes**
- This happens **only once**
- Data is cached inside `/data`

You **will NOT need to download these again** unless you delete `/data`.

---

### 🔁 Re-training is safe and incremental

- You can train **multiple wake words** back-to-back
- You do **NOT** need to clear any folders between runs
- Old models are preserved in timestamped output directories
- All required cleanup and reuse logic is handled automatically

---

## 📦 Output Files

When training completes, you’ll get:
- `<wake_word>.tflite` – quantized streaming model  
- `<wake_word>.json` – ESPHome-compatible metadata  

Both are saved under:

```text
/data/output/
```

Each run is placed in its own timestamped folder.

---

## 🎤 Optional: Personal Voice Samples (Advanced)

If you record personal samples:
- They are automatically augmented
- They are **up-weighted during training**
- This significantly improves real-world accuracy

No configuration required — detection is automatic.

---

## 🔄 Resetting Everything (Optional)

If you want a **completely clean slate**:

Delete the /data folder

Then restart the container.

⚠️ This will:
- Remove cached datasets
- Require re-downloading training data
- Delete trained models

---

## 🙌 Credits

Built on top of the excellent  
**https://github.com/kahrendt/microWakeWord**

Huge thanks to the original authors ❤️
